# Analysis Proposal EE282

### Abiageal Keegan

My ultimate goal is to investigate the impacts of gene therapy on Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy hiPSC-CMs, through transcriptomic data. Until I am ready to collect this data, I will hone my data analysis skills using an alternate dataset. As described in my project proposal, I plan to utilize e a dataset of raw FAST-Q Illumina scRNAseq files titled, “Human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes under hypoxia/normoxia, treated with bone marrow or cardiac stromal cell extracellular vesicles”. I will acquire this data set through the Sequence Read Archive via the National Library of Medicine containing over 30 million reads. All of my analysis will be conducted in the HPC utilizing R packages. 

I will begin my analysis by installing the FASTQ files onto my local machine by utilizing the SRA toolkit provided by the NCBI GitHub directory. This will have access to the large raw data files. I wil then utilize a 10X genomics pipeline titled “cellranger”. This pipeline will allow me to align the FAST-Q reads with the human reference genome, also provided publicly by NCBI. I will utilize “cellranger count” 10X genomics pipeline as the FAST-Q file I am referencing only contains data for gene expression and no antibody tagging. The results of this pipeline will provide me with a filtered gene expression matrix aligned to the human reference genome I provide with the 10X barcode to identify cells from certain conditions (treated/untreated and hypoxia/normal).

With this gene expression matrix, I will now utilize the popular scRNAseq R vignette Seurat. I want to ensure that my data is truly 'single cell'. 10X genomics utilizing a process in which each gem contains one cell. However, this process can be faulty. To remove empty gems or gems with more than one cell, I will set a minimum and maximum amount of features (genes) and filter out the data not fitting within that range. To capture dying cells, I will remove cells with higher percentages of mitochondrial DNA, a factor common in dead cells. I will then log normalize the data by normalizing the individual feature expressions to the total gene expression. This will prevent high abundance, 'housekeeping' genes from dominating the dataset.

I then want to identify features that are variable across the different cardiomyocyte conditons. To do so, I will utilize the FindVariableFeatures tool in the Seurat package. I will visualize this data via a plot. This function will automatically filter out non-variable features which would include shared housekeeping genes and genes specific to all cardiomyocytes (ex. cardiac marker cardiac troponin TNNT). My next goal is to identify clusters of cells. Before doing so, I must scale the data to shift the expression of the genes towards zero. Thus, the mean expression of most genes will be zero and thus ignored whereas highly variable gene expression will be slightly higher. I will do so using the ScaleData Seurat function.

Now, I will take the steps towards clustering and visualizing my data to draw conclusions about the effect of hypoxia on cardiomyocytes. I will first perform PCA to identify principal components with shared gene expression patterns. However, this can result in too many small principal components, which decreases the interpretability of the dataset. In order to find the ideal amount of principal components, I will make an elbow plot to rank the variance among each PC and identify the amount of principal components in which the components themselves become less highly variable.

Once I have all of my PCs, I can then cluster the cells using the FindClusters tool and perform a non-dimensional UMAP to visualize my data in 2D. To identify my clusters, I will utilize the FindMarkers function to see if there are proliferating cardiomyocytes or damaged cardiomyocytes that are more prevelant depending on the condition. This UMAP will be labeled and visualized using R's plotting tool ggplot2.

Overall, I believe this analysis will be feasible due to the numerous amount of resources on Seurat Vignettes and scRNAseq analysis troubleshooting. This analysis will best prepare me to analyze my own data in the future. It will also allow me to become even more familiar with cardaic biomarkers that may vary across cardiomyocytes.
